feat: 1665 implement custom sharding -- android (#1763)
Flank/flank: docs/feature/1665-custom-sharding.md

# Custom sharding

##### NOTE: Currently for android only, iOS support will be released soon

With [#1665](https://github.com/Flank/flank/issues/1665) Flank received the new feature called `Custom Sharding`. It
enables Flank to consume predefined sharding and apply it during a test run. The feature gives flexibility and enables
manual optimization. It also allows users to set up different sharding per app-test apk pair (android only).

## Android

Below you can find an example flow with all features explained

### 1. Acquire dump shard for current configuration

Suppose you config with options:

`flank.yml`

```yml
gcloud:
  app: ./app-debug.apk
  robo-script: ./MainActivity_robo_script.json
flank:
  max-test-shards: 2
  additional-app-test-apks:
    - test: ./debug-1.apk
    - test: ../build-dir/debug-2.apk
    - test: gs://path/to/your/bucket/debug-3.apk
```

`flank firebase test android run -c=flank.yml` will run on 4 matrices:

> * 1x Robo run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 1x Robo run ( just for example that `robo-script` will not collide with custom sharding on `additional-app-test-apks` )
```

        "class com.package4.subpackage.TestClass6#test3"
      ],
      "shard-1": [
        "class com.package4.TestClass4#test3",
        "class com.package4.subpackage.TestClass6#test1",
        "class com.package4.subpackage.TestClass6#test2"
      ]
    },
    "junit-ignored": [
    ]
  }
}
```

### 2. Prepare custom sharding JSON file

You can now make changes as you wish, flank will attempt to find corresponding app-test pair names, and then apply custom sharding.

1. for `debug-1.apk` let's add another shard and move `TestClassB#test4` & `TestClassB#test3` into it:

```json
{
  "matrix-0": {
    "app": "[PATH]/app-debug.apk",
    "test": "[PATH]/debug-1.apk",
    "shards": {
      "shard-0": [
        "class com.TestClassA#test1",
        "class com.TestClassA#test2"
      ],
      "shard-1": [
        "class com.TestClassA#test3",
        "class com.package2.TestClassB#test1",
        "class com.package2.TestClassB#test2"
      ],
      "shard-2": [
        "class com.package2.TestClassB#test4",
        "class com.package2.TestClassB#test3"
      ]
    },
    "junit-ignored": [
      "class com.TestClassA#ignoredTest"
    ]
  },

>   "matrix-1": {},
>   "matrix-2": {}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "matrix-1": { ... },
  "matrix-2": { ... }
```

}
```

2. for `debug-2.apk` we know that parameterized test takes lots of time so we want to have it in a separate shard:

```json
{
  "matrix-0": {},
  "matrix-1": {
    "app": "[PATH]/app-debug.apk",
    "test": "[PATH]/debug-2.apk",
    "shards": {
      "shard-0": [
        "class com.ParameterizedTest"
      ],
      "shard-1": [
        "class com.package3.TestClass3#test1",
        "class com.package3.TestClass3#test2",
        "class com.package3.TestClass3#test3",
        "class com.package3.TestClass3#test4",
        "class com.package3.TestClass3#test5"
      ]
    },
    "junit-ignored": [
      "class com.package.3.TestClassA#ignoredTest1",
      "class com.package.3.TestClassA#ignoredTest2"
    ]
  },

>   "matrix-2": {}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "matrix-2": { ... }
```

}
```

3. for `debug-3.apk` all tests are rather quick, so we don't care about sharding, let's move them into one shard:

```json
{

>   "matrix-0": {},
>   "matrix-1": {},

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "matrix-0": { ... },
  "matrix-1": { ... },
```

  "matrix-2": {
    "app": "[PATH]/app-debug.apk",
    "test": "gs://path/to/your/bucket/debug-3.apk",
    "shards": {
      "shard-0": [
        "class com.package4.TestClass4#test1",
        "class com.package4.TestClass4#test2",
        "class com.package4.subpackage.TestClass6#test3",
        "class com.package4.TestClass4#test3",
        "class com.package4.subpackage.TestClass6#test1",
        "class com.package4.subpackage.TestClass6#test2"
      ]
    },
    "junit-ignored": [
    ]
  }
}
```

4. Let's save newly created JSON as `custom_sharding.json`

> ### Add custom sharding to your configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3. Add custom sharding to your configuration
```

Update `flank.yml` with `custom-sharding-json` option:

```yml
gcloud:
  app: ./app-debug.apk
  robo-script: ./MainActivity_robo_script.json
flank:
  max-test-shards: 2
  additional-app-test-apks:
    - test: ./debug-1.apk
    - test: ../build-dir/debug-2.apk
    - test: gs://path/to/your/bucket/debug-3.apk
  custom-sharding-json: ./custom_sharding.json
```

> You can verify if shards are correctly applied by running the following command `flank firebase test android run -c=flank.yml --dump-shards`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can verify if shards are correctly applied by running the following command `flank firebase test android run -c=flank.yml --dump-shards`.
This command will parse your shards configuration JSON into internal structures used for executing test and will print them back to the JSON file.
The diff between the file specified in `custom-sharding-json` and the output file produced by `--dump-shards` should show that no changes were applied to custom shard configuration.
```

> ### Start Test Run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4. Start Test Run
```

      "class com.TestClassA#ignoredTest"
    ]
  },
  "matrix-1": {
    "app": "[PATH]/app-debug.apk",
    "test": "[PATH]/debug-2.apk",
    "shards": {
      "shard-0": [
        "class com.ParameterizedTest",
        "class com.package3.TestClass3#test5"
      ],
      "shard-1": [
        "class com.package3.TestClass3#test1",
        "class com.package3.TestClass3#test2",
        "class com.package3.TestClass3#test3",
        "class com.package3.TestClass3#test4"
      ]
    },
    "junit-ignored": [
      "class com.package.3.TestClassA#ignoredTest1",
      "class com.package.3.TestClassA#ignoredTest2"
    ]
  },
  "matrix-2": {
    "app": "[PATH]/app-debug.apk",
    "test": "[PATH]/debug-3.apk",
    "shards": {
      "shard-0": [
        "class com.package4.TestClass4#test1",
        "class com.package4.TestClass4#test2",
        "class com.package4.subpackage.TestClass6#test3"
      ],
      "shard-1": [
        "class com.package4.TestClass4#test3",
        "class com.package4.subpackage.TestClass6#test1",
        "class com.package4.subpackage.TestClass6#test2"
      ]
    },
    "junit-ignored": [
    ]
  }
}
```

### 2. Prepare custom sharding JSON file

> Now you can make changes of your interest, flank will try to find corresponding by app-test pair names, and then apply

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now make changes as you wish, flank will attempt to find corresponding app-test pair names, and then apply
```

    ]
  },
  "matrix-2": {}
}
```

3. for `debug-3.apk` all tests are rather quick, so we don't care about sharding, let's move them into one shard:

```json
{
  "matrix-0": {},
  "matrix-1": {},
  "matrix-2": {
    "app": "[PATH]/app-debug.apk",
    "test": "gs://path/to/your/bucket/debug-3.apk",
    "shards": {
      "shard-0": [
        "class com.package4.TestClass4#test1",
        "class com.package4.TestClass4#test2",
        "class com.package4.subpackage.TestClass6#test3",
        "class com.package4.TestClass4#test3",
        "class com.package4.subpackage.TestClass6#test1",
        "class com.package4.subpackage.TestClass6#test2"
      ]
    },
    "junit-ignored": [
    ]
  }
}
```

4. Let's save newly created JSON as `custom_sharding.json`

### Add custom sharding to your configuration

Update `flank.yml` with `custom-sharding-json` option:

```yml
gcloud:
  app: ./app-debug.apk
  robo-script: ./MainActivity_robo_script.json
flank:
  max-test-shards: 2
  additional-app-test-apks:
    - test: ./debug-1.apk
    - test: ../build-dir/debug-2.apk
    - test: gs://path/to/your/bucket/debug-3.apk
  custom-sharding-json: ./custom_sharding.json
```

> You can verify if shards are correctly applied `flank firebase test android run -c=flank.yml --dump-shards` and check if

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can verify if shards are correctly applied by running the following command `flank firebase test android run -c=flank.yml --dump-shards` and check if the result is what is expected.
```

> that is what you expected

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Start Test Run

> Now you can start a flank test run, with updated config there will be still 4 matrices:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 You can now start a flank test run. With the updated config there will still be 4 matrices:
```

* 1x Robo test
* 3x instrumentation tests:
  * `debug-1.apk` with 3 shards
  * `debug-2.apk` with 2 shards
  * `debug-3.apk` with 1 shard

## NOTE:

> * flank **DOES NOT** validate provided custom sharding JSON --  it's your responsibility to provide proper configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* flank **DOES NOT** validate the provided custom sharding JSON --  it's your responsibility to provide a proper configuration
```

> * flank apply sharding by searching test pairs by app apk and test apk paths

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* flank will apply sharding by searching for test pairs by app apk and test apk paths
```

* custom sharding supports `gs://` paths
* custom sharding JSON is a source of truth -- no smart sharding is applied (or sharding related configurations)

> * matrices ids and shards ids are not important, the only requirement is -- they should be unique

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* matrices ids and shard ids are not important, the only requirement is that -- they should be unique
```
